JUNE 12, 2015
Remarks by Sen. Bernie Sanders in Des Moines, Iowa

Thank you all so much for being here.

Our campaign is not a typical political organization. I am asking people to be part of a movement – a political revolution – to transform our country economically, politically, socially and environmentally. We’re building a movement of millions of Americans who are prepared to stand up and fight back

I believe the time has come to say loudly and clearly: enough is enough. This great nation and its government belong to all of the people, and not to a handful of billionaires, their Super-PACs and their lobbyists.

Now is NOT the time for thinking small. Now is NOT the time for the same old – same old establishment politics and stale inside-the-beltway ideas.

Now IS the time for millions of working families to come together, to revitalize American democracy, to end the collapse of the American middle class and to make certain that our children and grandchildren are able to enjoy a quality of life that brings them health, prosperity, security and joy – and that once again makes the United States the leader in the world in the fight for economic and social justice, for environmental sanity and for a world of peace.

This country faces more serious problems today than at any time since the Great Depression and, if you include the planetary crisis of climate change, it may well be that the challenges we face now are more dire than any time in our modern history.

Let’s be clear. This campaign is not about Bernie Sanders. It is not about Hillary Clinton. It is not about Jeb Bush or anyone else. This campaign is about the needs of the American people, and the ideas and proposals that effectively address those needs. As someone who has never run a negative political ad in his life, my campaign is driven by issues and serious debate; not political gossip, not reckless personal attacks or character assassination. This is what I believe you deserve. Politics in a democratic society should not be treated like a baseball game, a game show or a soap opera.

Let me take a minute to talk about some of the issues that I am focusing on to deal with the problems we face.

Income and Wealth Inequality

Today, we live in the wealthiest nation in the history of the world, but that reality means little because almost all of that wealth is controlled by a tiny handful of individuals. America now has more income and wealth inequality than any major country on earth, and the gap between the very rich and everyone else is wider than at any time since the 1920s. The issue of wealth and income inequality is the great moral issue of our time, it is the great economic issue of our time and it is the great political issue of our time.

Let me be very clear. There is something profoundly wrong when the top one-tenth of one percent owns almost as much wealth as the bottom ninety percent, and when ninety-nine percent of all new income goes to the top one percent. There is something profoundly wrong when we have a proliferation of millionaires and billionaires at the same time as millions of Americans work longer hours for lower wages and we have the highest rate of childhood poverty of any major country on earth. There is something profoundly wrong when one family owns more wealth than the bottom 130 million Americans. This grotesque level of inequality is immoral. It is bad economics. It is unsustainable. That is why we need a tax system that is fair and progressive, which makes wealthy individuals and profitable corporations begin to pay their fair share of taxes. This type of rigged economy is not what America is supposed to be about. This has got to change and, together we will change it.

This campaign is sending a message to the billionaire class:  “you can’t have it all.”  You can’t get huge tax breaks while children in this country go hungry.  You can’t continue sending our jobs to China while millions are looking for work. You can’t hide your profits in the Cayman Islands and other tax havens, while there are massive unmet needs on every corner of this nation.  Your greed has got to end.  You cannot take advantage of all the benefits of America, if you refuse to accept your responsibilities as Americans.

Economics

But it is not just income and wealth inequality.  It is the tragic reality that for the last 40 years the great middle class of our country – once the envy of the world – has been disappearing. Despite exploding technology and increased worker productivity, median family income is almost $5,000 less than it was in 1999.  Throughout this country it is not uncommon for people to be working two or three jobs just to cobble together enough income and some health care benefits to survive.

The truth is that real unemployment is not the 5.5 percent you read in newspapers. It is close to 11 percent if you include those workers who have given up looking for jobs or who are working part time when they want to work full time. And here is something we don’t hear much about.  According to a recent analysis of census bureau data by the Economic Policy Institute, real youth unemployment in this country has reached crisis proportions.  If you include those who are not working, who have given up looking for work or who are working part time, white high school graduates aged 17-20 have an unemployment rate of 33%, Hispanics in the same age group have an unemployment rate of 36%, while black youth have an unemployment rate of 51%.  Today, shamefully, we have 45 million people living in poverty, many of whom are working at low-wage jobs.

Raising Wages and Benefits  

Let us be honest and acknowledge that millions of Americans are now working for totally inadequate wages.  The current federal minimum wage of $7.25 an hour is a starvation wage and must be raised.  The minimum wage must become a living wage – which means raising it to $15 an hour over the next few years.  The benchmark of full time work in America should be simple and concrete – that no full-time worker should live in poverty.

And a living wage should not only be fair, it should be equitable. That is why we must establish pay equity for women workers by law. It’s unconscionable that women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to men who perform the same work.  We must also end the scandal in which millions of American employees, often earning less than $30,000 a year, work 50 or 60 hours a week – and earn no overtime.

Further, the United States must end the international embarrassment of being the only major country on earth, the only one, which does not guarantee workers paid medical and family leave, paid sick time and paid vacation time.  Last place is no place for America.  That is why I will fight for 12 weeks of paid family leave, at least 10 days of paid vacation time and seven days of paid sick time.  My Republican colleagues talk a lot about “family values.”  Well, let me be very clear.  It is not a family value to force the mother of a new born baby to go back to work a few days after she gives birth, because she doesn’t have the money to stay home and bond with her baby.  That is not a family value.  That is an insult to everything that I know about what family is about.

Today, as a result of the collapse of our middle class and declining wages, the American people are working longer hours than the people of any other country – 137 hours a year more than the Japanese, 260 more hours per year than the British and 499 hours a year more than the French.  Over one hundred years ago, workers in this country marched in protest for a 40 hour work week.  Well, one hundred years later we still have not achieved that.  Incredibly, today, 85% of working men and 66% of working women work more than 40 hours a week.  And do you know what?  Many workers in this country get no or very little paid vacation time.  That has got to end.

Jobs, Jobs, Jobs 

If we are serious about reversing the decline of the middle class we need a major federal jobs program that puts millions of Americans back to work at decent paying jobs.  At a time when our roads, bridges, water systems, rail and airports are decaying, the most effective way to rapidly create meaningful jobs is to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure. That’s why I’ve introduced legislation that would invest $1 trillion over 5 years to modernize our country’s physical infrastructure. This legislation would create and maintain at least 13 million good-paying jobs, while making our country more productive, efficient and safe.  And I commit to you that as President, I will lead that legislation into law.

Trade 

I will also continue to oppose our current trade policies.  For decades, presidents from both parties have supported trade agreements that have cost us millions of decent paying jobs as corporate America shuts down plants here and moves to low-wage countries. As President, my trade policies will break that cycle of agreements that enrich the few at the expense of working people.

Reforming Wall Street

It is time to break up the largest financial institutions in the country. Wall Street cannot continue to be an island unto itself, gambling trillions in risky financial instruments while expecting the public to bail it out.  We need a banking system that is part of creating a productive economy, not a handful of huge banks on Wall Street that engage in reckless and illegal activities. If a bank is too big to fail it is too big to exist.

Citizens United and Campaign Finance Reform

My friends – let me be as blunt as I can while telling you what you already know. As a result of the disastrous Supreme Court decision in the Citizens United case, the American political system has been totally corrupted, and the foundations of American democracy are being undermined. What the Supreme Court essentially said was that it was not good enough for the billionaire class to own much of our economy. They could now own the U.S. government as well. And that is precisely what they are trying to do.

If we are serious about creating jobs, about climate change and the needs of our children, our veterans and the elderly, we must be deadly serious about campaign finance reform. That is why I will not nominate any justice to the Supreme Court who has not made it clear that he or she will move to overturn that disastrous decision which is undermining our democracy.  Long term, we need to go further and establish public funding of elections, so that the dark money of American politics is stopped before democracy is bought and paid for by a handful of billionaires and corporations.

American democracy is not about corporations and billionaires being able to buy candidates and elections. It is not about Wall Street and big oil or the Koch brothers and Sheldon Adelson spending billions of dollars to elect candidates who will make the rich richer and everyone else poorer. According to media reports the Koch brothers alone, one family, will spend more money in this election cycle than either the Democratic or Republican parties. This is not democracy. This is oligarchy. The defining principle of American democracy is one person, one vote – with every citizen having an equal say – and no voter suppression. And that’s the kind of American political system we have to fight for.

College For All

And when we talk about education, let me be very clear.  In a highly competitive global economy, we need the best-educated workforce we can create.  It is insane and counter-productive to the best interests of our country and its future, that hundreds of thousands of bright young people can not afford to go to college, and that millions of others leave school with a mountain of debt that burdens them for decades.  That shortsighted path to the future must end.  As President, I will fight to make tuition in public colleges and universities free, as well as substantially lower interest rates on student loans. Every person, young and old in America should be given the tools to realize their full god given potential.

Climate Change

When we talk about our responsibilities as human beings and as parents, there is nothing more important than leaving our planet healthy and habitable for our kids and grandchildren. The debate is over. The scientific community has spoken in a virtually unanimous voice. Climate change is real. It is caused by human activity and it is already causing devastating problems in the United States and around the world.

The scientists are telling us that if we do not boldly transform our energy system away from fossil fuels and into energy efficiency and sustainable energies, this planet could be five to ten degrees Fahrenheit warmer by the end of this century. This is catastrophic. It will mean more drought, more famine, more rising sea level, more floods, more ocean acidification, more extreme weather disturbances, more disease and more human suffering. We must not, we cannot, and we will not allow that to happen.

The United States must lead the world in reversing climate change. We can do that if we transform our energy system away from fossil fuels, toward energy efficiency and such sustainable energies such as wind, solar, geo-thermal and biomass.  Millions of homes and buildings need to be weatherized, our transportation system needs to be energy efficient, and we need a tax on carbon to accelerate the transition away from fossil fuel and provide funding to transition energy workers into new industries and jobs.

Health Care for All

The United States remains the only major country on earth that does not guarantee health care for all as a right. Despite the gains of the Affordable Care Act, 35 million Americans continue to lack health insurance and many more are under-insured. Yet, we continue paying far more per capita for health care than any other nation. The United States must join the rest of the industrialized world and guarantee health care to all as a right by moving toward a Medicare-for-All single-payer system.

Protecting Our Most Vulnerable

At a time when millions of Americans are struggling to keep their heads above water economically, at a time when senior poverty is increasing, at a time when millions of kids are living in dire poverty my Republican colleagues are trying to make a terrible situation even worse.   If you can believe it, the Republican budget throws 27 million Americans off health insurance, makes drastic cuts in Medicare, throws millions of low income Americans, including pregnant women off nutrition programs, and makes it harder for working-class families to afford college or put their kids into Head Start.  And then, to add insult to injury, they provide huge tax breaks for the very, very wealthiest families in this country while they raise taxes on working families.

Well, let me tell my Republican colleagues that I respectfully disagree with their approach.  Instead of cutting Social Security, we need to expand Social Security benefits.  Instead of cutting head start and childcare, we need to move to a universal pre-k system for all the children of this country. As Franklin Delano Roosevelt reminded us: “The test of our progress is not whether we add more to the abundance of those who have much, it is whether we provide enough for those who have little.” And that is a test that we as a nation must once again meet and master.

Racial Justice and Economic Opportunity

The struggle for equality continues today in America, and the front line of that struggle is the inner cities throughout our nation. From Ferguson  to Baltimore and across the nation, too may African Americans and other minorities find themselves subjected to a system that treats citizens who have not committed crimes like criminals.

If current trends continue, 1 in 3 black males born today can expect to spend time in prison during their lifetime. This is an unspeakable tragedy. But this crisis of over incarceration is not just a destruction of human life. It is also costly to the taxpayers who pay almost $70 Billion a year for prisons. It makes a lot more sense to me to be investing in jobs and job training . . . than to be building more and more jails and to be locking up more and more people. This issue is a crisis in American society. It is an international disgrace. That is why I have submitted legislation to spend $5.5 billion dollars to fund job-training programs for inner city youth. As a former Mayor I understand the importance of police community relations, and the need today across America to improve the climate and dialogue in those relations.  Instead of building more and more prisons, we need to be building more and more meaningful lives where young people can have a future, not be stuck in a dead end with no hope or opportunity.

Immigration Reform

Today millions of decent, hardworking people live in America with no hope of gaining the status to live and work here legally. Many were brought here in their youth, and other came to find a life free of fear, oppression, war or deprivation. We need a rational immigration process, not the Republican alternatives of self deportation or some other draconian non-solution. I believe in a path to citizenship, and I agree with President Obama’s plans to do through executive action what the Congress reuses to do through legislation. We need to solve problems like immigration in American, not use these issues to promote division and hostility.

War and Peace 

As everybody knows, we live in a difficult and dangerous world, and there are people out there who want to do us harm.  As President, I will defend this nation – but I will do it responsibly.  As a member of Congress I voted against the war in Iraq. I knew it was the right vote in 2002 when I cast it, and now many others recognize that it was the right vote today. I am vigorously opposed to an endless war in the Middle East – a war that is unwise and unnecessary. We must be relentless in combatting terrorism and defeating ISIS, but we should not have to bear that burden alone. We should be part of an international coalition, sustained by Muslim nations, which can not only defeat ISIS but also begin the process of creating conditions for a lasting peace. America has and will continue to shoulder the burden that is the cost of freedom at home and around the world, but that burden must be shared by other nations who have the resources and means to protect themselves and their corner of the earth.

Closing:

As some of you know, I was born in a far-away land called Brooklyn, New York.  My father came to this country from Poland at the age of 17 without a penny in his pocket and without much of an education. My mother graduated from high school in New York City. My father worked for almost his entire life as a paint salesman and we lived with my brother in a small rent-controlled apartment. My mother’s dream was to move out of that three-room apartment into a home of our own. She died young and her dream was never fulfilled. As a kid I learned what lack of money means to a family, and I also never liked to see people without a lot of wealth put down or pushed around. That is why when I was elected Mayor and then went on to Congress I tried everyday to be a voice for people who did not have a voice.

I have seen the promise of America in my own life. My parents would have never dreamed that their son would be a U.S. Senator, let alone run for President. But for too many of our fellow Americans, the dream of progress and opportunity is being denied by the crush of an economy that funnels all the wealth to the top.

I believe we can restore the promise of America again to every person who wants to work hard to build a future for themselves and their family.

We can live in a country:

Where every citizen has health care as a right, not a privilege;
Where every parent can have quality and affordable childcare and where all of our qualified young people, regardless of income, can go to college;
Where every senior can live in dignity and security, and not be forced to choose between their medicine and their food;
Where every veteran who defends this nation gets the quality health care and benefits they have earned and receives the respect they deserve;
Where the inner cities of our nation become safer, and where people who want to succeed are treated fairly and given a helping hand;
Where every person who dreams of becoming a citizen has a rationale path forward, not just a dark corner to hide in;
Where everyone, no matter their race, their religion, their disability or their sexual orientation realizes the full promise of equality that is our birthright as Americans.
That is the nation we can build together, and I ask you to join me in this campaign to build a future that works for all of us, and not just the few on top.

Thank you, and now I would be happy to answer your questions.


